---
layout: default
title: Measure Theory and Sigma Algebras
parent: Probability Theory
grand_parent: All Things Statistics
has_toc: false
has_children: true
usemathjax: true
---

# Measure Theory and Sigma Algebras
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

# Prelude on Sets

A set is nothing but a collection of objects. In probability theory, these objects are often times events. Furthermore, sets in probability theory, much like other branches of math, are usually constructed in a way such that the objects in the sets are endowed with some sort of logic. Taking an example from analysis, $X = \\{x \in \mathbb{R} : x^2 < 2\\}$, the set $X$ is precisely all real numbers who square is less than 2. The logical struture endowed on each object in the set is precisely described as follows: each object inside $X$ must be between $-\sqrt{2}$ and $\sqrt{2}$ and cannot be exactly $\pm \sqrt{2}$. In this sense, a set is constructed to define a logical structure endowed upon all points within the set.

In a more advanced manner, we can consider the set of all open intervals in $\mathbb{R}$. In written form, $B := \\{(a,b) : -\infty \leq a < b \leq \infty\\}$. Every point in the set $\mathcal{B}$ is an _interval_ (not a number). (The $\sigma$-algebra generated by this set $\mathcal{B} = \sigma(B)$ is called the _Borel algebra_ on the real numbers - more on this later.) For now, the key takeaway is that where a set is defined, then a logic is defined.

# Motivation for Sigma-Algebras and Measurability

In probability, one fundamental object of interest is the **outcome space** denoted by $\Omega$. This is the set of all possible observable outcomes. Any subset of $\Omega$ is called an **event** For example, in flipping a coin twice, the outcome space is

$$\Omega := \{HH,HT,TH,TT\}$$

This is a countable set of events, and in their entirety, forms the outcome space $\Omega$. Here $\Omega$ has a cardinality of 4, and it is a finite outcome space. Things are easy to calculate here. For example $\mathbb{P}(\text{at least one head}) = \frac{\\|\\{HH,HT,TH\\}\\|}{\\|\Omega\\|} = 3/4$.

In the example above, the outcome space is finite, and all possible subsets of the outcome space is enumerable and we can assign probabilities to each event in $2^\Omega$. However in an infinite outcome space, it is no longer possible to enumerate all the events of interest with probabilities along with the fact that $2^\mathbb{N}$ is clearly uncountable (any $f: 2^\mathbb{N} \to \mathbb{N}$ is a surjection). Instead, we focus our attention to subsets of "interest." In this context, a set is interesting if these sets a probability assigned to it and we wish to evaluate the probability. In any outcome space we would be interested in events as enumerated below:

1. The empty set, which has probability of 0
2. For a given event, the complement of the event should also be of interest
3. For any given set of events, their unions should be also of interest

These three qualities completely define all sets that are of interest to us. Of course, you might wonder, what about set intersections, using the coin flipping example, we might be interested in the quantity $\\{HH,HT,TH\\} \cap \\{HT, HT, TT\\}$. Namely, this is the intersection of the event where we get at least one head, and the event where we get at least one tail. The intersection of these two events is $\\{HT, TH\\}$, which is clearly a set of interest, and it has probability $1/2$. Surprisingly, this set intersection example is already covered by the 3 qualities of "interesting" events. The exercise immediately below will help you understand why we have closure under intersections despite never mentioning intersections.

These three charactersitics of "interesting events" forms a logical structure called the $\sigma$-algebra. A $\sigma$-algebra of events in $\Omega$ is simply the power set $2^\Omega$ which has 16 elements in it. Now if we consider the outcome space of rolling a six-sided die, the $\sigma$-algebra of events is again the power set of $2^{\\{1,...,6\\}}$ which has $2^6 = 64$ elements. Now lets make the game more complicated, and suppose the computer rolls the dice for us, and it will not tell us the result of the roll. Instead, it will check if the number is 1 or 2 in which it will tell us 'A'. If the roll was a 3 or 4, the computer will tell us 'B'. And finally if the roll was a 5 or 6, the computer will tell us 'C'. So we never observe any numbers, and we only observe the resulting 'A', 'B', or 'C'. Our $\sigma$-algebra will look like: 

$$\Omega := \{\emptyset, \{1,2\}, \{3,4\}, \{5,6\}, \{1,2,3,4\}, \{3,4,5,6\}, \{1,2,5,6\}, \{1,2,3,4,5,6\} \}$$

1, 2, and 3 motivate the structure of a $\sigma$-algebra. A $\sigma$-algebra represents a collection or series of logical steps to determine sets of "interest." While this is true, the motivation is far from developed. Recall that the goal of probability is to assign a "size" of these sets of "interest" and the larger the size, the more "probable" the event can occur. In order to understand size and measurability, we should study measures and why a $\sigma$-algebra is critical in the development of a measure.  

# Measures

A **measure** is a function we denote with $\mu: \mathcal{F} \to [0,\infty]$. It is a function that assigns a positive number to a set. Within the realm of probability theory, we will only consider positive measures, and eventually we will only consider measures where $\mu: \mathcal{F} \to [0,1]$. Before we do any of that, it is important to learn about properties of a measure function.

> **Definition**: Measure functions
> 1. $\mu(A) \geq 0$ for any $A \in \mathcal{F}$
> 2. $\mu(\emptyset) = 0$
> 3. If $A\_1,...,A\_n,...$ are all disjoint, then $\mu(\cup\_{n=1}^\infty A\_n) = \sum\_{n=1}^\infty \mu(A\_n)$

Note the first point goes without saying when considering a function with a range of $[0,\infty]$. As mentioned above, a set is measaurablbe if and only if is is in a $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{F}$ over an outcome space $\Omega$. Thus we call $(\Omega, \mathcal{F})$ a _measurable space_. If a particular measure function $\mu$ is endowed upon this measurable space, then the triple $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mu)$ denotes a _measure space_. 

**Exercise**: Given the measure space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mu)$, show that for any $B\in\mathcal{F}$, $\mu(B\cap A) = \mu\_B(A)$ is a measure function hence $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mu\_B)$ forms a measure space.

One classical measure that we are all familiar with is the **Lebesgue measure** often denoted with $\lambda$. It is defined as the length of an interval, so that $\lambda((a,b]) = b-a$ and is the same for any combination of open or closed or half open/closed intervals. While in probability theory, the focus is not developing rigor in the measure function, it is helpful to know about how mathematics thinks of a measure function. 

## Measure Functions

A **measure function** (a measur_able_ function is a **different concept**), assigns a number to a measurable set. Intuitively, a good measure function should exhibit the following properties in measurable space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F})$:

> 1. $\mu : 2^{\mathbb{R}} \to [0,\infty]$, any subset of the real numbers should have a measure
> 2. $\mu([a,b]) = b-a$, the measure of an interval is simply its length
> 3. $\mu(A) = \mu(A + c)$ for some $c\in\mathbb{R}$, shifting an interval by a constant $c$ does not affect its measure
> 4. $\mu(\cup\_{n\geq 1} A\_n) = \sum_{n\geq 1} A\_n$, for a disjoint collection of intervals, the measure of its union should be the sum of each measure

One proposed measure is the **outer measure**, which attempts to look at the universe of all coverings of sets that can be composed as a union of such compact intervals (we are only considering $\mathbb{R}^1$). That is, by Heine-Borel, for any open covering of $[a,b]$, there is a finite subcover that still covers $[a,b]$. From a review of analysis, it should be clear that a union of compact sets is still compact, thus we can find from any open cover, a finite subcover that covers a union of compact sets. Then the **outer measure** can be given by:

$$ m^*(A) := \inf \left\lbrace \sum_{i=1}^\infty \ell(I_i) : \forall \{I\}_{i>1} \text{ s.t. } A \subseteq \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty I_i \right\rbrace $$ 

where $I_i$ is a compact interval of the form $[a,b]$ and we define $\ell(I) = b-a$. Intuitively, by taking the outer measure, we are trying to find the "smallest" covering of $A$ such that we still fully cover $A$, and we sum the lengths of the intervals $I_i$ to get the outer measure. The outer measure suffices several of the 4 properties, but assuming any 3 properties will imply that the remaining property cannot hold. A detailed treatement on this is given in Chapter 2 of Sheldon Axler's [Measure, Integration and Real Analysis](https://measure.axler.net/). However, we do see some interesting properties about the measure function that hold for the outer measure. A key property is _monotonicity_.

(Note that we can also define an inner measure by finding the size of the "largest" subset within $A$)

> **Monotonicity of outer measure**
> If $A \subseteq B$ then $m^*(A) \leq m^*(B)$

_Proof_: If $A \subseteq B$ then all coverings of $B$ will also cover $A$. So:

$$C_A := \left\lbrace \sum_{i=1}^\infty \ell(I_i) : \forall \{I\}_{i>1} \text{ s.t. } A \subseteq \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty I_i \right\rbrace \subseteq \left\lbrace \sum_{i=1}^\infty \ell(I_i) : \forall \{I\}_{i>1} \text{ s.t. } B \subseteq \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty I_i \right\rbrace =: C_B$$

Then $\inf C\_A \leq \inf C\_B$ so $m^{\*}(A) \leq m^{\*}(B)$. $\tag*{∎}$

### Lebesgue Measure

To rememdy the issues mentioned above with $m^{\*}(\cdot)$, we must relax one of the 4 properties above. Property 2, 3, and 4 are desirable properties of a measure and we cannot give them up. That is, we wish for the length of an interval $[a,b]$ to be $b-a$, to be translational invariant, and to be additive. Then the only property to relax is 1, in the sense that we cannot assign measure to all subsets of $\mathbb{R}$. The natural question to ask is "By how much can we relax property 1?" To begin asking this question, note that there are sets in $2^\mathbb{R}$ that cause $m^{\*}(\cdot)$ to disobey the 4 properties of measure. These sets are called **non-measurable** and trying to assign a measure on these sets is futile. Instead, we can only define a measure on measurable sets. At the most fundamental level, we can define a measure on $[a,b]$ which is $b-a$. This is the **Lebesgue measure** defined for an interval. We can further develop the Lebesgue measure of a Borel set to be its outer measure, but we will not go in that direction.

However, understanding the pitfalls of measures motivates our understanding of $\sigma$-algebras as a collection of sets that are measurable. 

# Sigma Algebras

Taking points 1, 2, and 3 in [Motivation for Sigma-Algebras and Measurability](#motivation-for-sigma-algebras-and-measurability) defining sets of "interest," we can translate the characteristics of an interesting set into mathematics. So the $\sigma$-algebra (for our purposes, this is also a $\sigma$-field or $\sigma$-ring) defined on $\Omega$ is the collection of events $\mathcal{F}$ such that

> **Definition**: $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$:
> 1. $\emptyset \in \mathcal{F}$
> 2. If $A \in \mathcal{F}$ then $A^C \in \mathcal{F}$, (so by 1. we have $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$)
> 3. For any countable (need not be finite) sequence of sets $A_1,...,A_n,...\in \mathcal{F}$, then $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i \in \mathcal{F}$

At this point, we should reflect back on the prelude to set theory. A $\sigma$-algebra really is a logical structure, defining what it means to be a set of "interest." Specifically, given any set of elements in $\mathcal{F}$ we know their complements are also in $\mathcal{F}$, and their unions are also in $\mathcal{F}$. We call any set in the $\sigma$-algebra to be measurable.

**Exercise**: Show that countable intersections are closed under $\mathcal{F}$, i.e. if $A_1,...,A_n,...$ then $\cap_{i=1}^\infty A_i \in \mathcal{F}$ (Hint: use De Morgan's Laws.)

**Exercise**: Write the $\sigma$-algebra of the outcome space of flipping two coins. (Hint: There should be 16 elements in the resulting sigma algebra.)

Note in the outcome space of a dice roll, depending on how we as observers will record outcomes, the $\sigma$-algebras will be of different size, i.e. recording $\\{1,2\\}$ as the same event (in the previous example, this would be the event of observing 'A') or recording $\\{1\\}, \\{2\\}$ as two seperate events. This is clear, since above, we noted that the $\sigma$-algebra "generated" on $\\{1,2,3,4,5,6\\}$ would have a cardinality of 64, while the $\sigma$-algebra "generated" on $\\{\\{1,2\\},\\{3,4\\},\\{5,6\\}\\}$ has a cardinality of 8. $\sigma$-algebras can be viewed in relation to each other, and it would convey the idea of "level of information." Denote $\mathcal{A}_1 = \sigma(\\{1,2,3,4,5,6\\})$ to be the $\sigma$-algebra "generated" by $\\{1,2,3,4,5,6\\}$. Denote also $\mathcal{A}_2 = \sigma(\\{\\{1,2\\},\\{3,4\\},\\{5,6\\}\\})$ to be the $\sigma$-algebra "generated" by $\\{\\{1,2\\},\\{3,4\\},\\{5,6\\}\\}$.

**Exercise**: Show that $\mathcal{A}_1 \supseteq \mathcal{A}_2$ as defined above. (Hint: Both are $\sigma$-algebras, and it suffices to show all elements in $\mathcal{A}_2$ are in $\mathcal{A}_1$. To be thorough, find an element that is in $\mathcal{A}_2$ but not in $\mathcal{A}_1$.)

If you were successful in the exercise above, then you have shown that one $\sigma$-algebra is "smaller" than the other. Essentially, the scenario that produced the collection of sets of interest, $\mathcal{A}_2$, yields less information about your data generating process to you, when compared to the information from the scenario producing $\mathcal{A}_1$. That is, an observer in the scenario producing $\mathcal{A}_1$ will can in theory measure in all events in $\mathcal{A}_2$ but an observer in the scenario producing $\mathcal{A}_2$ will not be able to even know of the existence of some events in $\mathcal{A}_1$. 

Namely, in the scenario producing $\mathcal{A}_2$, the set $\\{1\\}$ does not exist in $\mathcal{A}_2$, so $\\{1\\}$ is not $\mathcal{A}_2$-measurable. But of course, it is $\mathcal{A}_1$-measurable. So, if we can observe a quantity, we can measure it. If we do not know a quantity exists, we cannot measure it. 

## Generation of Sigma-Algebras

By now, you should have noticed that we used the term "generated" in quotes. Generation has a specific meaning when it comes to set theory, and a $\sigma$-algebra generated by some set $X$ is defined as the following: 

> **Definition**: Sigma-Algebra generation
> Let $\mathcal{F}\_n$ denote a $\sigma$-algebra that contains $X$, and we index each with $n$. The collection of $\sigma$-algebras is given by $\\{\mathcal{F}\_n\\}\_{n\in J}$. This means that $J$ is the indexing set of $\mathcal{F}\_n$. Then the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $X$ is defined as $\sigma(X) = \cap_{n\in J} \mathcal{F}\_n$.


By elementary set theory, we know that $\sigma(X) \subseteq \mathcal{F}_n$ for any $\mathcal{F}_n$ that is a $\sigma$-algebra containing $X$. Recal from above, we defined a Borel $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{B}$ to be the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the open intervals in $\mathbb{R}$ also known as $B := \\{(a,b) : -\infty \leq a < b \leq \infty\\}$. Some examples of sets that are in $\mathcal{B}$:

1. $(1,2) \cap (4,5) \in \mathcal{B}$ since $(1,2)$ and $(4,5)$ are each in $B$ and $\mathcal{B}$ is closed under intersection
2. $(1,2] \in \mathcal{B}$ since we can take $(1,2+1/n)$ which is clearly in $B$, no matter how large or small $n$ is. And since $2$ is always in $(1,2+1/n)$ for all $n$, then taking intersections over all $n\in\mathcal{N}$, the resulting set is $(1,2]$. As $\mathcal{B}$ should be closed under countable intersection, then $(1,2]$ must be in $\mathcal{B}$
3. $\\{2\\} \in \mathcal{B}$ since we can take $(2-1/n, 2+1/n)$ and by the same logic as above and by closure under countable intersection, $\\{2\\}\in\mathcal{B}$  

**Exercise**: Show that $\mathcal{B}$ as generated by $B$, can also be generated by the following set: $B_\mathbb{Q} := \\{(a,b): -\infty \leq a < b \leq \infty\\, \forall a,b\in\mathbb{Q}\\}$. (Hint: The real numbers are a completion of the rational numbers.)

**Exercise**: Show that $\mathcal{B}$ as generated by $B$, can also be generated by the following set: $B_C := \\{(a,b]: -\infty \leq a < b \leq \infty\\}$.

**Exercise**: Show that if $X \subseteq Y$ then $\sigma(X) \subseteq \sigma(Y)$.

**Exercise**: Show that $\sigma(X)$ is indeed still a $\sigma$-algebra. (Hint: Check the three conditions of a $\sigma$-algebra.)


# Algebras, Monotone Classes, and Pi, and Lambda Systems

The notion of a $\sigma$-algebra is rather strong in that all countably infinite sequences of sets must be closed under countable unions in the $\sigma$-algebra. If we relax this rule, and instead impose closure under finitely many unions, then we have an **algebra**. So:

> **Definition**: Algebra on $\Omega$:
> 1. $\emptyset \in \mathcal{F}$
> 2. If $A \in \mathcal{F}$ then $A^C \in \mathcal{F}$, (so by 1. we have $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$)
> 3. For any countably finite sequence of sets $A_1,...,A_n \in \mathcal{F}$, then $\cup_{i=1}^n A_i \in \mathcal{F}$

In the case of the finite outcome space $\Omega$, the $\sigma$-algebra on $\Omega$ is the same as the algebra on $\Omega$. However in an infinite outcome space, The algebra is not the same as the $\sigma$-algebra. Try and come up with an example in the following exercise.

**Exercise**: Let $\mathcal{A}\_1 \subseteq ... \subseteq \mathcal{A}\_n \subseteq ...$. Show that $\cap\_{i=1}^N \mathcal{A}\_i$ for a finite $N$ forms a $\sigma$-algebra, and find a counter example to show that $\cap_{i=1}^\infty \mathcal{A}\_i$ is not a $\sigma$-algebra. (Hint: Consider a generating $\sigma$-algebra, where for each index $n$, we partition the unit interval $[0,1]$ further.)

These logical structures of sets are less restrictive than the $\sigma$ algebra which coupled with the idea of $\sigma$-algebra generation, is very powerful. To foreshadow the power of generation in conjunction with simpler logical structures, note that we may show that two measure functions $\mu, \lambda$ that agree on an algebra will also agree on a $\sigma$-algebra (we may make the same statement for $\pi$-systems too). This is not supposed to make sense to you right now, especially if this is your first exposure to measure theory and before we do any of this, we need to introduce and discuss some properties of these simpler structures. The following introduction of logical structures may seem unmotivated and unconnected at first, but rest assured that they will be useful very soon. Treat the following terms as a list of definitions for now. First, we introduce a $\pi$-system which is a logical structure defined as:

> **Definition**: $\pi$-system $P$ on $\Omega$:
> 1. $P$ is non-empty
> 2. If $A, B \in P$ then $A \cap B \in P$

A $\pi$-system can also be generated, for example $\pi(\\{A,B\\})$ is the intersection of all $\pi$-systems that contain the sets $\\{A,B\\}$. $\pi(\\{A,B\\}) = \\{A,B, A\cap B\\}$. 

**Exercise**: Show that a $\pi$-system on $\Omega$ is an algebra on $\Omega$.

Now we introduce a $\lambda$-system which is sometimes called a Dynkin system named after [Eugene Dynkin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_Dynkin), another Soviet mathematician.

> **Definition**: $\lambda$-system $L$ on $\Omega$:
> 1. $L$ contains the empty set
> 2. If $A, B \in L$ then $A \cap B \in L$
> 3. If $A\_1,...,A\_n,...$ are disjoint then $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A\_i \in L$

Likewise, a $\lambda$-system can be generated. $\lambda(\\{A,B\\})$ is the intersection of all $\lambda$-systems containing the sets $\\{A,B\\}$. This is not a very illustrative example since we must have closure under nested increasing sets in $\lambda$ which is impossible to write out in this manner. Do not confuse $\lambda(\cdot)$ as a measure function with $\lambda(\cdot)$ as a generator. In this context, it is clear we are talking about a $\lambda$-system generated by some set. Typically, $\lambda(\cdot)$ refers to a measure function.

**Exercise**: Enumerate $\lambda(\\{A,B\\})$ and justify why each element in this $\lambda$-system should be in the collection. Assume subsets $A, B$ are both in $\Omega$. 

**Exercise** (Dynkin's $\pi-\lambda$ theorem): Show that a $\lambda$-system that is also a $\pi$-system is a $\sigma$-algebra

### Monotone Class and Monotone Class Theorem

> **Definition**: Monotone class $\mathcal{M}$:
> 1. If $A\_1 \subseteq ... \subseteq A\_n \subseteq ...$ then $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A\_i \in \mathcal{M}$
> 2. If $A\_1 \supseteq ... \supseteq A\_n \supseteq ...$ then $\cap_{i=1}^\infty A\_i \in \mathcal{M}$

Likewise, monotone classes can be generated, and $\mathcal{M}(X)$ is defined as the intersection of all monotone classes containing $X$. 

**Exercise**: Show that if $A$ is an algebra, then $\mathcal{M}(A)$ is a $\sigma$-algebra.

**Exercise** (Monotone Class Theorem): Furthermore, show that $\mathcal{M}(A) = \sigma(A)$. (Hint: showing $\sigma(A) \subseteq \mathcal{M}(A)$ is straightforward and follows from the previous exercise. To show $\mathcal{M}(A) \subseteq \sigma(A)$, collect sets in $\mathcal{M}(A)$ such that the collection is closed under intersection to show that $\mathcal{M}(A)$ is closed under intersections, making it a $\pi$-system. Then collect sets in $\mathcal{M}(A)$ such that properties of the $\lambda$-system hold. Thus $\mathcal{M}(A) \subseteq \sigma(A)$. Refer to the "principle of good sets"). 

The above exercise tells us that $\mathcal{M}(A) = \sigma(A)$. Thus if we want to show some property is true for all elements of $\sigma(A)$, it suffices to consider the property on $\mathcal{M}(A)$ where we only need to check for closure under nested unions and intersections, provided $A$ is an algebra of sets.

The definitions of the collections and logical structures provide a powerful mechanism to help us understand how to "extend" a measure, as we have not yet properly defined a measure function on a $\sigma$-algebra.

# Extension of Measures

So far, we have not properly defined what it means to measure a set in $\mathcal{B}$, the Borel $\sigma$-algebra. $[a,b]$ is surely in $\mathcal{B}$ and we defined the measure of the interval to be $\tilde{\lambda}([a,b]) = \ell([a,b]) = b-a$. (Here, $\tilde{\lambda}(\cdot)$) denotes the Lebesgue measure defined on intervals $[a,b]$.) Note that $[a,b] \cap [c,d]$ will also form a compact interval if not empty. If you do not believe this, try all cases while maintaining $a<b$ and $c<d$. For example, when $c<a<d<b$ the intersection of intervals gives $[a,d]$. This should ring a bell, the logical structure for which intervals where $\tilde{\lambda}([a,b]) = \ell([a,b]) = b-a$ forms a $\pi$-system. The following result is critical in developing the Lebesgue measure.

### Caratheodory's Extension Theorem

More generally speaking, knowing that two measures agree on a $\pi$-system is sufficient to say that the two measures will also agree on a $\sigma$-algebra. This is known as Caratheodory's Extension Theorem, named after [Constantin Caratheodory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantin_Carath%C3%A9odory). His extension theorem effectively states that if $\tilde{\lambda}$ is defined on an algebra $A$, then there exists another measure function $\lambda$ defined on sets in $\sigma(A)$ such that $\tilde{\lambda}=\lambda$ on $A$. The statement of this theorem is far more important than its proof. In effect, this says that so long as we can define a measure function on an algebra or a $\pi$-system, then we know there exists another measure function defined on the generated $\sigma$-algebra, and these measures coincide when measuring sets in the algebra or $\pi$-system. Furthermore, the extended measure is unique.

Here is a sketch of the proof of the uniqueness of the extension theorem.

_Proof_: Consider the following:.

$$\Pi := \{A \in \mathcal{A} : \lambda(A) = \tilde{\lambda}(A)\}\, \mathcal{A} \text{ is a }\pi\text{-system containing }\Omega$$

Clearly $\Pi \subseteq \mathcal{A}$. We first show that $\Pi$ is a $\lambda$-system. $\Omega \in \Pi$ since $\lambda(\Omega) = \tilde{\lambda}(\Omega)$. If $A, B \in \Pi$ then $\lambda(A\setminus B) = \lambda(A) - \lambda(A \cap B) = \tilde{\lambda}(A) - \tilde{\lambda}(A\cap B) = \tilde{\lambda}(A \setminus B)$ thus $A \setminus B \in \Pi$ (as we have agreement on a $\pi$-system). Finally, if disjoint sequence $A\_1,..., A\_n, ... \in \Pi$ then $\lambda(\cup A\_n) = \tilde{\lambda}(\cup A\_n) = \sum \lambda(A\_n) = \sum \tilde{\lambda}(A\_n)$ by equivalence of measures. Thus $\Pi$ is a $\lambda$-system and it is a $\lambda$-system that obviously contains $\Pi$. Thus $\lambda(\mathcal{A}) \subseteq \Pi$ as the generated system is always smaller than another other system of the same type. This means, the collection of sets with agreeing measures form at least a $\lambda$-system generated by $\mathcal{A}$.

Now we show that $\Pi$ is also a $\pi$ system. Let $B$ be another set in the $\pi$-system that includes $\Omega$ as defined above as $\mathcal{A}$. Define the collection:

$$\mathcal{D} := \{A \in \lambda(\mathcal{A}) : (A\cap B) \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})\}\subseteq \lambda(\mathcal{A})$$

We will show that $\mathcal{D}$ is a $\lambda$-system of $\mathcal{A}$ that contains $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$ meaning it is exactly $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$ ($\mathcal{D} \subseteq \supseteq \lambda(\mathcal{A})$). Further, it is closed under intersection. This shows that $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$ is also a $\pi$-system and thus a $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mathcal{A}$. First, we freely accept $\Omega \in \mathcal{D}$ as $\Omega \in \mathcal{A}$ and $\Omega \cap B = B$. Second, if $X,Y \in \mathcal{D}$ then $X \cap B \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})$ and $Y\cap B \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})$. Because of that, $X \cap B \cap (Y \cap B)^C \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})$ since it is a $\lambda$-system. Then $(X\cap B \cap Y^C) \cup (X\cap B \cap B^C) = X \cap (Y^C \cap B) = X \setminus Y \cap B \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})$ therefore making $X\setminus Y \in \mathcal{D}$. Third, if we have a disjoint sequence of $X\_1,...,X\_n,... \in \mathcal{D}$ then $X\_k \cap B \in \lambda(\mathcal{A}) \forall k$ and it is easy to show that $(\cup\_k X\_k)\cap B \in \lambda(\mathcal{A})$ so $(\cup\_k X\_k) \in \mathcal{D}$. 

Thus $\mathcal{D}$ is a $\lambda$-system containing $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$. So $\mathcal{D} \supseteq \lambda(\mathcal{A})$. But since $\mathcal{D} \subseteq \lambda(\mathcal{A})$ by definition, then $\mathcal{D} = \lambda(\mathcal{A})$. Therefore, $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$ is also a $\pi$-system as it is closed under finite intersections. By the $\pi$-$\lambda$ theorem, $\lambda(\mathcal{A})\supset \sigma(\mathcal{A})$ since the $\lambda(\mathcal{A})$ is also $\sigma$-algebra that contains $\mathcal{A}$. From above, $\Pi \supseteq \lambda(\mathcal{A}) \supset \sigma(\mathcal{A})$ so any element in $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is also in $\Pi$. This means that any element in $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ will produce agreement in measure between the $\lambda$ and $\tilde{\lambda}$ measure functions, as being an element of $\Pi$ means the two measures on the element of $\Pi$ should agree. $\tag*{∎}$

In essense, the proof followed the following steps:

1. Define a logic on a set of events called $\Pi$, namely the logic is that $\Pi$ contains events where the $\lambda(\cdot)$ and $\tilde{\lambda}(\cdot)$ measures agree, and the events come from a $\pi$-system $\mathcal{A}$
2. Show that the set of events is a $\lambda$-system containing $\mathcal{A}$ therefore it is at least as large as the $\lambda$-system generated by the $\mathcal{A}$
3. Show that the $\lambda$-system that contains a $\pi$-system is also a $\pi$-system (by defining $\mathcal{D}$ and using the principle of good sets)
4. Step 3, if successful will imply that $\mathcal{D}$ is exactly the $\lambda$-system containing $\mathcal{A}$. 
4. By Dynkin's $\pi-\lambda$ theorem, we show that $\mathcal{D}$ is is also a $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mathcal{A}$, therefore it is a $\sigma$-algebra at least as large as $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$
5. Thus $\Pi \supseteq \mathcal{D} \supseteq \sigma(\mathcal{A})$ therefore all sets in the $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ must also be in $\Pi$, the set of all items that have agreeing measures $\lambda$ and $\tilde{\lambda}$.

A critical implication of this theorem is that we are now able to generalize our measure function $\lambda$ to a $\sigma$-algebra, by solely defining the measure on a $\pi$-system. This provides a mechanism to extend the Lebesgue measure on intervals, to the $\sigma$-algebra generated by intervals. In the context of probability theory, we can define a probability measure on a $\pi$-system and we will be able to extend this measure to all events in a $\sigma$-algebra generated from said $\pi$-system.

#### Technical Remark of Caratheodory's Extension Results

In some situations, we are unable to fully define a measure for every possible set in a $\sigma$-algebra as they may be very large. In many cases, it is futile to try and enumerate all elements in a $\sigma$-algebra. If we take the Borel $\sigma$-algebra of $[0,1]$ there are an uncountably many different sets in the $\sigma$-algebra. However, if we do know how to define a measure $\tilde{\lambda}$ on a $\pi$-system $\mathcal{A}$, a measure exists on sets in $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ and will agree with $\tilde{\lambda}$ as also measured on sets in $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. This implies the existence of a measure on a $\sigma$-algebra and its uniqueness.

**Exercise**: Show that any Borel set $B$ in $\mathbb{R}$ can be expressed as a $S \subset B \subset T$ where $\lambda(T\setminus B) < \varepsilon$ and $\lambda(B\setminus S) < \delta$ for any $\varepsilon, \delta > 0$ and $S, T$ are disjoint countable unions of compact sets in $\mathbb{R}$.

For now, we rest measure theory and in the next part, we will begin talking about probability as a measure function.